# Plot Posterior Calendar Age Estimate for an Individual Determination after Joint Calibration

Once a joint calibration function (any of
[PolyaUrnBivarDirichlet](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/reference/PolyaUrnBivarDirichlet.md),
[WalkerBivarDirichlet](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/reference/WalkerBivarDirichlet.md)
or
[PPcalibrate](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/reference/PPcalibrate.md))
has been run to calibrate a set of related radiocarbon determinations,
this function plots the posterior calendar age estimate for a given
single determination. Shown are a (direct) histogram of the posterior
calendar ages generated by the MCMC chain and also a (smoothed) kernel
density estimate obtained using a Gaussian kernel. The highest posterior
density (HPD) interval is also shown for the interval width specified
(default 2\\\sigma\\).

For more information read the vignettes:  
[`vignette("Non-parametric-summed-density", package = "carbondate")`](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/articles/Non-parametric-summed-density.md)  
[`vignette("Poisson-process-modelling", package = "carbondate")`](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/articles/Poisson-process-modelling.md)

**Note:** The output of this function will provide different results
from independent calibration of the determination. By jointly, and
simultaneously, calibrating all the related \\{}^{14}\\C determinations
using the library functions we are able to share the available calendar
information between the samples. This should result in improved
individual calibration.

## Usage

``` r
PlotCalendarAgeDensityIndividualSample(
  ident,
  output_data,
  calibration_curve = NULL,
  plot_14C_age = TRUE,
  plot_cal_age_scale = "BP",
  hist_resolution = 5,
  density_resolution = 1,
  interval_width = "2sigma",
  bespoke_probability = NA,
  n_burn = NA,
  n_end = NA,
  show_hpd_ranges = FALSE,
  show_unmodelled_density = FALSE,
  plot_pretty = TRUE
)
```

## Arguments

- ident:

  The individual determination for which you want to plot the posterior
  density estimate of the calendar age.

- output_data:

  The return value either from one of the Bayesian non-parametric DPMM
  functions
  ([PolyaUrnBivarDirichlet](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/reference/PolyaUrnBivarDirichlet.md)
  or
  [WalkerBivarDirichlet](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/reference/WalkerBivarDirichlet.md));
  or from the Poisson process modelling function
  ([PPcalibrate](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/reference/PPcalibrate.md)).

- calibration_curve:

  This is usually not required since the name of the calibration curve
  variable is saved in the output data. However, if the variable with
  this name is no longer in your environment then you should pass the
  calibration curve here. If provided, this should be a dataframe which
  should contain at least 3 columns entitled `calendar_age`, `c14_age`
  and `c14_sig`. This format matches
  [intcal20](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/reference/intcal20.md).

- plot_14C_age:

  Whether to use the radiocarbon age (\\{}^{14}\\C yr BP) as the units
  of the y-axis in the plot. Defaults to `TRUE`. If `FALSE` uses
  F\\{}^{14}\\C concentration instead.

- plot_cal_age_scale:

  The calendar scale to use for the x-axis. Allowed values are "BP",
  "AD" and "BC". The default is "BP" corresponding to plotting in cal yr
  BP.

- hist_resolution:

  The distance between histogram breaks when plotting the individual
  posterior calendar age density. Default is 5.

- density_resolution:

  The distance between calendar ages for the returned smoothed calendar
  age probability. Default is 1.

- interval_width:

  The confidence intervals to show for the calibration curve and for the
  highest posterior density ranges. Choose from one of "1sigma" (68.3%),
  "2sigma" (95.4%) and "bespoke". Default is "2sigma".

- bespoke_probability:

  The probability to use for the confidence interval if `"bespoke"` is
  chosen above. E.g., if 0.95 is chosen, then the 95% confidence
  interval is calculated. Ignored if `"bespoke"` is not chosen.

- n_burn:

  The number of MCMC iterations that should be discarded as burn-in
  (i.e., considered to be occurring before the MCMC has converged). This
  relates to the number of iterations (`n_iter`) when running the
  original update functions (not the thinned `output_data`). Any MCMC
  iterations before this are not used in the calculations. If not given,
  the first half of the MCMC chain is discarded. Note: The maximum value
  that the function will allow is `n_iter - 100 * n_thin` (where
  `n_iter` and `n_thin` are the arguments given to
  [PolyaUrnBivarDirichlet](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/reference/PolyaUrnBivarDirichlet.md)
  or
  [WalkerBivarDirichlet](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/reference/WalkerBivarDirichlet.md))
  which would leave only 100 of the (thinned) values in `output_data`.

- n_end:

  The iteration number of the last sample in `output_data` to use in the
  calculations. Assumed to be the total number of (thinned) realisations
  stored if not given.

- show_hpd_ranges:

  Set to `TRUE` to also show the highest posterior density (HPD) range
  on the plot.

- show_unmodelled_density:

  Set to `TRUE` to also show the unmodelled density (i.e., the result of
  independent calibration using
  [CalibrateSingleDetermination](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/reference/CalibrateSingleDetermination.md))
  on the plot. Default is `FALSE`.

- plot_pretty:

  logical, defaulting to `TRUE`. If set `TRUE` then will select pretty
  plotting margins (that create sufficient space for axis titles and
  rotates y-axis labels). If `FALSE` will implement current user values.

## Value

A list, the first list element, `posterior_density`, with one column
`calendar_age_BP` containing the calendar ages, and the other column
`probability` containing the (smoothed) kernel density estimate of the
probability at that calendar age.

The second list element, `plot_par`, contains the plotting/graphical
parameters of the plot to allow for editing/annotation.

## See also

[CalibrateSingleDetermination](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/reference/CalibrateSingleDetermination.md)
for independent calibration of a sample against a calibration curve.

Also, to annotate the plot, see
[AddTextPlot](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/reference/AddTextPlot.md),
[AddLinePlot](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/reference/AddLinePlot.md)
and
[AddShadingPlot](https://tjheaton.github.io/carbondate/reference/AddShadingPlot.md)

## Examples

``` r
# NOTE 1: These examples are shown with a small n_iter to speed up execution.
# When you run ensure n_iter gives convergence (try function default).

# NOTE 2: The examples only show application to  PolyaUrnBivarDirichlet output.
# The function can also be used with WalkerBivarDirichlet and PPcalibrate output.

polya_urn_output <- PolyaUrnBivarDirichlet(
    two_normals$c14_age,
    two_normals$c14_sig,
    intcal20,
    n_iter = 500,
    n_thin = 2,
    show_progress = FALSE)

# Result for 15th determination
PlotCalendarAgeDensityIndividualSample(15, polya_urn_output)


# Now change to show 1 sigma interval for HPD range and calibration curve
# and plot in yr AD
PlotCalendarAgeDensityIndividualSample(
    15,
    polya_urn_output,
    plot_cal_age_scale = "AD",
    interval_width = "1sigma",
    show_hpd_ranges = TRUE,
    show_unmodelled_density = TRUE)


# Plot and then assign the returned probability
individual_post_density_plot <- PlotCalendarAgeDensityIndividualSample(15, polya_urn_output)
posterior_dens <-  individual_post_density_plot$posterior_density

# Use this to find the mean posterior calendar age
weighted.mean(posterior_dens$calendar_age_BP, posterior_dens$probability)
#> [1] 5000.778

# Add annotation to the plot
AddLinePlot(individual_post_density_plot,
    v = 5050,
    col = "darkorange",
    lwd = 2,
    lty = 2)

AddTextPlot(individual_post_density_plot,
    x = 5050, y = 4370,
    labels = expression(paste("5050 cal yrs BP")),
    cex = 0.7,
    pos = 4,
    offset = 0.2,
    col = "darkorange")

```
